National resources: Norway (#146)
elixir-europe/infectious-diseases-toolkit: national-resources/norway.md

The FHI advises health authorities on public health issues, including disease prevention, outbreak control, and preparedness for national health emergencies. The institute works with the Directorate of Health to develop vaccination programs, guide infection control measures, and support healthcare providers and related institutions. The [Division of Infection Control](https://www.fhi.no/en/about/this-is-the-norwegian-institute-of-public-health/divisions/infection-control-environmental-health/) within FHI supports infectious disease research, monitors infectious disease outbreaks, and analyses data related to these outbreaks. During the recent pandemic, FHI published a [handbook for medical researchers](https://www.fhi.no/nettpub/overvaking-vurdering-og-handtering-av-covid-19-epidemien-i-kommunen/) to understand the handling of SARS-CoV-2 variants data.

Several governmental organisations collaborate with FHI to monitor pathogenic data and support surveillance initiatives:

> * [The Norwegian Environment Agency](https://www.environmentagency.no) oversees detection of pathogens in wastewater and tracks occurrences of antimicrobial resistance (AMR) in natural areas and wild species. The agency is known as [Miljødirektoratet](https://www.miljodirektoratet.no) in Norwegian and has a Norwegian homepage too.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [The Norwegian Environment Agency](https://www.environmentagency.no) (or [Miljødirektoratet](https://www.miljodirektoratet.no),  in Norwegian) oversees detection of pathogens in wastewater and tracks occurrences of antimicrobial resistance (AMR) in natural areas and wild species.
```

* [The Norwegian Food Safety Authority](https://www.mattilsynet.no/language/english/) (Mattilsynet) plays a key role in managing and preventing infectious disease outbreaks that occur within the country’s food chain. The authority guides and drafts legislations related to food and drinking water, oversees the production and distribution processes of all food in Norway, and investigates and tracks pathogens found in drinking water and domestic animals. On behalf of the Food Safety Authority, the national reference laboratories collect data on isolated infectious agents from disease outbreaks related to the food chain and submit it to surveillance databases.
* [The Norwegian Medicines Agency](https://legemiddelverket.no/English) (Legemiddelverket) regulates and supervises medicine, medical devices, and clinical trials in Norway.
In addition to the national-level health authorities and agencies, there are regional/municipality-level efforts taking place across hospitals in Norway to combat infectious diseases:

> * The [Norwegian National Advisory Unit on Tropical Infectious Diseases](https://helse-bergen.no/nasjonal-kompetansetjeneste-for-tropiske-infeksjonssykdommer/norwegian-national-advisory-unit-on-tropical-infectious-diseases) contributes to tropical infectious disease research, standards, and training. They are responsible for reporting on and mapping imported tropical infectious diseases as part of a larger European network.

Reviewer: This link is broken, unsure if the page has moved recently?

Author: Fixed it. Thanks for pointing it out!

> *  [The Influenza Centre for Western Norway](https://www.influensasenteret.no/) focuses on development and evaluation of influensa vaccines as well as characterisation of immune responses after vaccination and infection. In 2020, they expanded their research to cover the COVID-19 outbreak and vaccine development. The Influenza Centre for Western Norway (Influensasenteret) is a collaboration between FHI, the University of Bergen, and Haukeland University Hospital 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*  [The Influenza Centre for Western Norway](https://www.influensasenteret.no/) focuses on the development and evaluation of influenza vaccines, as well as the characterisation of immune responses after vaccination and infection. In 2020, they expanded their research to cover the COVID-19 outbreak and vaccine development. The Influenza Centre for Western Norway (Influensasenteret) is a collaboration between FHI, the University of Bergen, and Haukeland University Hospital 
```

* Corona-Reg studies the long-term health effects of Covid-19 and the Covid-19 pandemic on the Norwegian population. [Project index on CRIStin](https://app.cristin.no/projects/show.jsf?id=2058809) (2020-2025)
* Covid-19 utbrudd i Norge- Epidemiologi, bruk av helsetjenester og håndtering i primærhelsetjenesten – CONOPRI investigates handling of the Covid-19 pandemic by primary health care services. [Project index on CRIStin](https://app.cristin.no/projects/show.jsf?id=2151826) (2020-2025)
* Building Stronger Public Health Institutions and Systems (BIS) aims to strengthen public health in Norway and abroad. [Project index on CRIStin](https://app.cristin.no/projects/show.jsf?id=2527375) (2021-2025)
* Consolidation of the HERA-WGS-infrastructure and capacity building at NIPH to enhance microbial surveillance and preparedness. [Project index on CRIStin](https://app.cristin.no/projects/show.jsf?id=2571637) (2022-2025)
* Infeksjonssykdommers epidemiologi i Østfold analyses registry-based information on infectious diseases in Norway, especially Østfold. [Project index on CRIStin](https://app.cristin.no/projects/show.jsf?id=535246) (2016-2026)

> You will find information on other surveillance systems and databases under the sections [Dashboards and visualisation platforms](#disease-surveillance-initiatives) and [National data sources](#national-data-sources).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will find information on other surveillance systems and databases in the [disease surveillance initiatives](#disease-surveillance-initiatives) and [National data sources](#national-data-sources) sections.
```

> You will find information on other surveillance systems and databases under the sections [Dashboards and visualisation platforms](https://www.infectious-diseases-toolkit.org/national-resources/norway#disease-surveillance-initiatives) and [National data sources](https://www.infectious-diseases-toolkit.org/national-resources/norway#national-data-sources).

Reviewer: The links in this piece are broken, would be better if they were more 'relative' links so e.g. /#navigating-the-dashboard/, because this would enable them to be tested prior to publication

Author: @bedroesb As similar to RDMkit where we have page ID https://rdmkit.elixir-europe.org/editorial_board_guide#related-pages, is it possible in IDTk to link to sections (within a page) with heading/ID? instead of full link to a specific section of the page Thanks!

Reviewer: you should be able to do the markdown like: [Dashboards and visualisation platforms](#disease-surveillance-initiatives) and [National data sources](#national-data-sources).

Author: Thanks @LianeHughes updated the links, hopefully the links work fine on published page.

[NORM](https://www.fhi.no/en/hn/health-registries/norm/) monitors antimicrobial resistance (AMR) incidences in humans over time. Its partner project NORM-VET tracks AMR in animals, food, and animal feed.

As the Norwegian node for the European Antimicrobial Resistance Surveillance Network, the University Hospital of North Norway (UNN) operates a national health registry that collects and processes AMR data. FHI manages data handling. To access the data, you need to print out and mail an [application available on UNN’s website](https://unn.no/fag-og-forskning/norm-norsk-overvakingssystem-for-antibiotikaresistens-hos-mikrober#forskning) - available in Norwegian only.

### Data Access to the Registries
Since the registries contain data that can potentially be linked to individuals, you have to apply for access. Applications are free for students (up to master’s level) who want to access anonymous aggregated data. Access to other types of data, including access to personally identifiable data [is subject to a fee](https://helsedata.no/no/priser). The [Health Data Service (Helsedataservice)](https://helsedata.no/en/) at the Norwegian Directorate of e-Health handles the applications.

> 
> In addition to health registries, [Biobank Norway](https://bbmri.no/) serves as a national data source and it is part of the [European biobanking research infrastructure (BBMRI-ERIC)](https://www.bbmri-eric.eu/) that maintains clinical and population-based data including infectious disease data. For a collection of DNA and sample cultures, the [microbiology portal (mikrobiologiportalen)](https://mikrobiologiportalen.no/) provides a [database of various bacterial and viral species, including a collection of methods for antigen-antibody detection methods performed across laboratories](https://mikrobiologiportalen.no/index.php?action=medmikro&filter=metode&object=gsjnZ4gmzy).

Reviewer: ```suggestion

### Data from biobanks
In addition to health registries, [Biobank Norway](https://bbmri.no/) serves as a national data source and it is part of the [European biobanking research infrastructure (BBMRI-ERIC)](https://www.bbmri-eric.eu/) that maintains clinical and population-based data including infectious disease data. For a collection of DNA and sample cultures, the [microbiology portal (mikrobiologiportalen)](https://mikrobiologiportalen.no/) provides a [database of various bacterial and viral species, including a collection of methods for antigen-antibody detection methods performed across laboratories](https://mikrobiologiportalen.no/index.php?action=medmikro&filter=metode&object=gsjnZ4gmzy).
```

When it comes to scientific research, [Norges Forskningsråd (Research Council of Norway)](https://www.forskningsradet.no/en/) has a [policy that requires open access to research data (revised 2017, in PDF)](https://www.forskningsradet.no/siteassets/publikasjoner/1254032622112.pdf). [The council highlights the importance of open science with useful resources](https://www.forskningsradet.no/en/research-policy-strategy/open-science/).

## Domain-specific infrastructures or resources 
<!--- e.g. human data, covid-19. Please, only add domain-specific resources that you think don't fit in the table at the bottom--->
### National infrastructures
* [The Norwegian Institute of Public Health’s Antibiotic Committee (Folkehelseinstituttets antibiotikakomitéen)](https://www.fhi.no/sv/antibiotikaresistens/antibiotikakomiteen/). The [FHI provides a general information and resources on antibiotic resistance](https://www.fhi.no/sv/antibiotikaresistens/), useful for the public, researchers, and health service professionals alike.

> * [CAMRIA (Combatting Antimicrobial Resistance with Interdisciplinary Approaches)](https://camria.w.uib.no/), launched at the University of Bergen (UiB), is a research centre with multiple partners (Haukeland University Hospital and Stavanger University Hospital) that work together to address AMR topics in a context of microbial genomics and related areas.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [CAMRIA (Combatting Antimicrobial Resistance with Interdisciplinary Approaches)](https://camria.w.uib.no/), launched at the University of Bergen (UiB), is a research centre with multiple partners (Haukeland University Hospital and Stavanger University Hospital) that work together to address AMR topics in the context of microbial genomics and related areas.
```

* [The Norwegian Environment Agency](https://www.environmentagency.no) (or [Miljødirektoratet](https://www.miljodirektoratet.no),  in Norwegian) oversees detection of pathogens in wastewater and tracks occurrences of antimicrobial resistance (AMR) in natural areas and wild species.
* [The Norwegian Food Safety Authority](https://www.mattilsynet.no/language/english/) (Mattilsynet) plays a key role in managing and preventing infectious disease outbreaks that occur within the country’s food chain. The authority guides and drafts legislations related to food and drinking water, oversees the production and distribution processes of all food in Norway, and investigates and tracks pathogens found in drinking water and domestic animals. On behalf of the Food Safety Authority, the national reference laboratories collect data on isolated infectious agents from disease outbreaks related to the food chain and submit it to surveillance databases.
* [The Norwegian Medicines Agency](https://legemiddelverket.no/English) (Legemiddelverket) regulates and supervises medicine, medical devices, and clinical trials in Norway.

> In addition to the national-level health authorities and agencies, there are regional/municipality-level efforts taking place across hospitals in Norway to combat infectious diseases:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

In addition to the national-level health authorities and agencies, there are regional/municipality-level efforts taking place across hospitals in Norway to combat infectious diseases:

```

* [The Norwegian Food Safety Authority](https://www.mattilsynet.no/language/english/) (Mattilsynet) plays a key role in managing and preventing infectious disease outbreaks that occur within the country’s food chain. The authority guides and drafts legislations related to food and drinking water, oversees the production and distribution processes of all food in Norway, and investigates and tracks pathogens found in drinking water and domestic animals. On behalf of the Food Safety Authority, the national reference laboratories collect data on isolated infectious agents from disease outbreaks related to the food chain and submit it to surveillance databases.
* [The Norwegian Medicines Agency](https://legemiddelverket.no/English) (Legemiddelverket) regulates and supervises medicine, medical devices, and clinical trials in Norway.

In addition to the national-level health authorities and agencies, there are regional/municipality-level efforts taking place across hospitals in Norway to combat infectious diseases:

>   * The [Norwegian National Advisory Unit on Tropical Infectious Diseases](https://helse-bergen.no/nasjonalt-senter-for-tropiske-infeksjonssykdommer)(webpage in Norwegian) contributes to tropical infectious disease research, standards, and training. They are responsible for reporting on and mapping imported tropical infectious diseases as part of a larger European network.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * The [Norwegian National Advisory Unit on Tropical Infectious Diseases](https://helse-bergen.no/nasjonalt-senter-for-tropiske-infeksjonssykdommer)(webpage in Norwegian) contributes to tropical infectious disease research, standards, and training. They are responsible for reporting on and mapping imported tropical infectious diseases as part of a larger European network.
```

>   * The [Norwegian National Advisory Unit on Tropical Infectious Diseases](https://helse-bergen.no/nasjonalt-senter-for-tropiske-infeksjonssykdommer)(webpage in Norwegian) contributes to tropical infectious disease research, standards, and training. They are responsible for reporting on and mapping imported tropical infectious diseases as part of a larger European network.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The [Norwegian National Advisory Unit on Tropical Infectious Diseases](https://helse-bergen.no/nasjonalt-senter-for-tropiske-infeksjonssykdommer)(webpage in Norwegian) contributes to tropical infectious disease research, standards, and training. They are responsible for reporting on and mapping imported tropical infectious diseases as part of a larger European network.
```

>   *  [The Influenza Centre for Western Norway](https://www.influensasenteret.no/) focuses on the development and evaluation of influenza vaccines, as well as the characterisation of immune responses after vaccination and infection. In 2020, they expanded their research to cover the COVID-19 outbreak and vaccine development. The Influenza Centre for Western Norway (Influensasenteret) is a collaboration between FHI, the University of Bergen, and Haukeland University Hospital 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*  [The Influenza Centre for Western Norway](https://www.influensasenteret.no/) focuses on the development and evaluation of influenza vaccines, as well as the characterisation of immune responses after vaccination and infection. In 2020, they expanded their research to cover the COVID-19 outbreak and vaccine development. The Influenza Centre for Western Norway (Influensasenteret) is a collaboration between FHI, the University of Bergen, and Haukeland University Hospital 
```

    registry: Other
    url: https://www.ttanetwork.net/events/courses/
  - name: Medical microbiology and infectious diseases course at Kristiania University College
    registry: Other
    url: https://www.kristiania.no/en/syllabus/kristiania-professional-college-/tertiary-vocational-education/ysh-02/medical-microbiology-and-infectious-diseases/
  - name: Training for the infectious diseases speciality in Norway (Open Access article, Solberg 2000)
    registry: Other
    url: https://www.clinicalmicrobiologyandinfection.com/article/S1198-743X(14)63185-2/fulltext
  - name: Introduction to infectious disease modelling course at University of Oslo (UiO)
    registry: Other
    url: https://www.uio.no/studier/emner/medisin/med/MF9120/
  - name: Learning resources by infeksjonskontroll.no
    registry: Other
    url: https://www.infeksjonskontroll.no/kompetanse

# Refer to entries of the "main_tool_ and_resource_table" if institutions, organizations and projects from the country contribute to the development of international tools and resources. 

national_resources: 
  - name: SARS-CoV-2 Database
    description: Norwegian SARS-CoV-2 database

>     how_to_access: Open for everyone

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    how_to_access:
```
Should leave field empty when it's open (or a little key appears)

    instance_of: 
    related_pages:
        # More information on which page_id you can use can be found at https://www.infectious-diseases-toolkit.org/contribute/website_overview 
        human_biomolecular_data: 
        human_clinical_and_health_data: 
        socioeconomic_data:
        pathogen_characterisation: 
        showcase: 
    url: https://covid19.sfb.uit.no/
    registry:
      fairsharing: 10.25504/FAIRsharing.668458

  - name: Folkehelseinstituttet (FHI)
    description: Norwegian Institute of Public Health (NIPH) portal for infectious disease information

>     how_to_access: Open Access

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    how_to_access:
```

    instance_of: 
    related_pages:
        # More information on which page_id you can use can be found at https://www.infectious-diseases-toolkit.org/contribute/website_overview 
        human_biomolecular_data:
        human_clinical_and_health_data: 
        socioeconomic_data:
        pathogen_characterisation: 
        showcase:
    url: https://www.fhi.no/en/id/infectious-diseases/
    registry:

  - name: FEGA Norway
    description: Federated European Genome-phenome Archive (EGA) node
    how_to_access: Life Science RI Login; intended for data from Norwegian institutions
    instance_of: The European Genome-phenome Archive (EGA)
    related_pages:
        # More information on which page_id you can use can be found at https://www.infectious-diseases-toolkit.org/contribute/website_overview 
        human_biomolecular_data:
        human_clinical_and_health_data:
        socioeconomic_data:
        pathogen_characterisation:
        showcase:
    url: https://ega.elixir.no/
    registry: 

  - name: RDMkit’s national resources page for Norway
    description: RDMkit page on Norway’s RDM guidelines and resources for life scientists

>     how_to_access: Open Access

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    how_to_access:
```

    instance_of: <!--- REPLACE THIS with the tool name of which this resource is an instance of, taken from the all tools and resources page --->
    related_pages:
        # More information on which page_id you can use can be found at https://www.infectious-diseases-toolkit.org/contribute/website_overview 
        human_biomolecular_data:
        human_clinical_and_health_data:
        socioeconomic_data:
        pathogen_characterisation:
        showcase:
    url: https://rdmkit.elixir-europe.org/no_resources
    registry:

>   - name: usegalaxy.no

Author: It's a local instance of Galaxy platform for analysis of all types of data that could also include infectious disease data.

    description: Instance of Galaxy for users in Norway, usegalaxy.no is linked with NeLS.
    how_to_access: FEIDE, NeLS ID (upon application)
    instance_of: Galaxy
    related_pages:
        # More information on which page_id you can use can be found at https://www.infectious-diseases-toolkit.org/contribute/website_overview 
        human_biomolecular_data:
        human_clinical_and_health_data:
        socioeconomic_data:
        pathogen_characterisation:
        showcase:
    url: https://usegalaxy.no/
    registry:
      tess: https://tess.elixir-europe.org/events/using-the-norwegian-e-infrastructure-for-life-science-nels-and-usegalaxy-no

>   - name: Tjenester for Sensitive Data (TSD)

Author: Do you mean the TSD? It's for storage of sensitive data that could include infectious disease data. May not be necessary to mention as there is also a link to RDMkit tool assembly page on TSD, which one you suggest we keep or shall I remove both?

    description: Services for sensitive data, a platform for researchers to collect, store, and analyze sensitive research data
    how_to_access: Application (registration requires a minID login)
    instance_of: <!--- REPLACE THIS with the tool name of which this resource is an instance of, taken from the all tools and resources page --->
    related_pages:
        # More information on which page_id you can use can be found at https://www.infectious-diseases-toolkit.org/contribute/website_overview 
        human_biomolecular_data:
        human_clinical_and_health_data:
        socioeconomic_data:
        pathogen_characterisation:
        showcase:
    url: https://www.uio.no/english/services/it/research/sensitive-data/index.html
    registry:

>   - name: Norway’s Tool Assembly about sensitive data service (TSD)

Author: Removed

    description: Tool Assembly RDMkit Page on TSD

>     how_to_access: Open to everyone

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    how_to_access:
```

    instance_of: <!--- REPLACE THIS with the tool name of which this resource is an instance of, taken from the all tools and resources page --->
    related_pages:
        # More information on which page_id you can use can be found at https://www.infectious-diseases-toolkit.org/contribute/website_overview 
        human_biomolecular_data:
        human_clinical_and_health_data:
        socioeconomic_data:
        pathogen_characterisation:
        showcase:
    url: https://rdmkit.elixir-europe.org/tsd_assembly
    registry:
      tess: https://tess.elixir-europe.org/materials/data-management-planning-workshop-for-new-life-science-projects

>   - name: NeLS

Author: Removed. It's similar to TSD but for non-sensitive data

    description: Norwegian e-infrastructure for Life Sciences is a national portal for sharing, analysis, and mid-term storage of non-sensitive molecular life science data.
    how_to_access: Individuals with funding from a Norwegian funder or a project at a university can get access through Feide or through an application (for collaborators).
    instance_of: <!--- REPLACE THIS with the tool name of which this resource is an instance of, taken from the all tools and resources page --->
    related_pages:
        # More information on which page_id you can use can be found at https://www.infectious-diseases-toolkit.org/contribute/website_overview 
        human_biomolecular_data:
        human_clinical_and_health_data:
        socioeconomic_data:
        pathogen_characterisation:
        showcase:
    url: https://nels.bioinfo.no
    registry:
      biotools: biotools:nels

>   - name: Norway’s Tool Assembly about Norwegian e-Infrastructure for Life Sciences (NeLS)

Author: Removed

    description: Tool Assembly RDMkit Page on NeLS
    how_to_access: 
    instance_of: <!--- REPLACE THIS with the tool name of which this resource is an instance of, taken from the all tools and resources page --->
    related_pages:
        # More information on which page_id you can use can be found at https://www.infectious-diseases-toolkit.org/contribute/website_overview 
        human_biomolecular_data:
        human_clinical_and_health_data:
        socioeconomic_data:
        pathogen_characterisation:
        showcase:
    url: https://rdmkit.elixir-europe.org/nels_assembly
    registry:
      tess: https://tess.elixir-europe.org/materials/data-management-planning-workshop-for-new-life-science-projects

>   - name: Helsedirektoratet

Author: It is already mentioned in the page. I'll delete from here

    description: Norwegian directorate of health

>     how_to_access: Open to everyone

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    how_to_access:
```

        human_biomolecular_data:
        human_clinical_and_health_data:
        socioeconomic_data:
        pathogen_characterisation:
        showcase:
    url: https://www.helsedirektoratet.no/
    registry:

  - name: Meldingssystem for smittsomme sykdommer (MSIS-forskriften)
    description: Norwegian Surveillance System for Communicable Diseases (including infectious diseases)
    how_to_access: Application to access data can be made at https://helsedata.no
    instance_of: <!--- REPLACE THIS with the tool name of which this resource is an instance of, taken from the all tools and resources page --->
    related_pages:
        # More information on which page_id you can use can be found at https://www.infectious-diseases-toolkit.org/contribute/website_overview 
        human_biomolecular_data:
        human_clinical_and_health_data:
        socioeconomic_data:
        pathogen_characterisation:
        showcase:
    url: https://msis.no/
    registry:

  - name: Nasjonalt senter for e-helseforskning
    description: Norwegian Centre for e-Health Research

>     how_to_access: Open to everyone

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    how_to_access:
```

    related_pages:
        # More information on which page_id you can use can be found at https://www.infectious-diseases-toolkit.org/contribute/website_overview 
        human_biomolecular_data:
        human_clinical_and_health_data:
        socioeconomic_data:
        pathogen_characterisation:
        showcase:
    url: https://ehealthresearch.no/
    registry:

  - name: Feide
    description: The Norwegian portal for secure access and data sharing in education and research.
    how_to_access: Feide login (requires Norwegian electronic ID or username and password)
    instance_of: <!--- REPLACE THIS with the tool name of which this resource is an instance of, taken from the all tools and resources page --->
    related_pages:
        # More information on which page_id you can use can be found at https://www.infectious-diseases-toolkit.org/contribute/website_overview 
        human_biomolecular_data:
        human_clinical_and_health_data:
        socioeconomic_data:
        pathogen_characterisation:
        showcase:
    url: https://feide.no
    registry:

---

> ## Introduction 

Author: Removed the line "While the primary target audience is the scientific community in Norway, you will also find open-access resources e.g. on Research Data Management (RDM) topics that could be useful for the wider community."

This page discusses infectious disease research in Norway and provides information on relevant health authorities and initiatives. In addition, the page offers a collection of key considerations for researchers such as regulations for data handling and disease control. While the primary target audience is the scientific community in Norway, you will also find open-access resources (e.g. on Research Data Management (RDM) topics) that could be useful for the wider community.

## Health Authorities in Norway
<!--- A section to list and provide context to agencies/authorities/institutions which define public health measures and policies --->

> The [Norwegian Directorate of Health](https://www.helsedirektoratet.no/english) (Helsedirektoratet) and the [Norwegian Institute of Public Health](https://www.fhi.no/en/) (Folkehelseinstituttet, referred to as FHI from here onwards) work jointly to provide an effective and coordinated effort towards the prevention and control of infectious diseases. The agencies also ensure that public health data is collected, stored, and shared in compliance with applicable laws and regulations.

Author: The health authorities section is mainly about FHI (Norwegian Institute of Public Health) and other organisations such as Helsedirektoratet are interconnected, hence a couple of paragraphs.

Several governmental organisations collaborate with FHI to monitor pathogenic data and support surveillance initiatives:
* [The Norwegian Environment Agency](https://www.environmentagency.no) oversees detection of pathogens in wastewater and tracks occurrences of antimicrobial resistance (AMR) in natural areas and wild species. The agency is known as [Miljødirektoratet](https://www.miljodirektoratet.no) in Norwegian and has a Norwegian homepage too.
* [The Norwegian Food Safety Authority](https://www.mattilsynet.no/language/english/) (Mattilsynet) works towards ensuring the safety of food and drinking water in Norway.
* [The Norwegian Medicines Agency](https://legemiddelverket.no/English) (Legemiddelverket) regulates and supervises medicine, medical devices, and clinical trials in Norway.

> In addition to the national-level health authorities and agencies, there are regional/municipality-level efforts taking place across hospitals in Norway to combat infectious diseases:

Author: We added little summary for the two organisations listed under 'regional/municipality-level efforts, thanks to @erincalhoun :)

* [Norwegian National Advisory Unit on Tropical Infectious Diseases](https://helse-bergen.no/nasjonal-kompetansetjeneste-for-tropiske-infeksjonssykdommer/norwegian-national-advisory-unit-on-tropical-infectious-diseases)
*  [The Influenza Centre: Research, Prevention, and Control of Influenza](https://www.influensasenteret.no/)

## Disease surveillance initiatives
### Projects
The FHI maintains a [wastewater monitoring project](https://www.fhi.no/cristin-prosjekter/aktiv/avlopsovervaking-sars-cov-2/) to better understand the spread of SARS-CoV-2 variants, and provides the latest [results from wastewater surveillance](https://www.fhi.no/en/hn/statistics/overvaking-smittsomme-sykdommer-i-avlopsvann/results-from-wastewater-surveillance/) page.

> FHI plans to consolidate their Health Emergency Preparedness and Response (HERA) and microbial whole-genome sequencing analysis initiatives in a [project to enhance microbial surveillance and preparedness](https://app.cristin.no/projects/show.jsf?id=2571637) (2022-25).

Author: We didn't find updates to the HERA consolidation project. Also, I think you may be looking at previous version of the page. In current version, the Project section begins with 'The European Joint Programme One Health'...

> FHI plans to consolidate their Health Emergency Preparedness and Response (HERA) and microbial whole-genome sequencing analysis initiatives in a [project to enhance microbial surveillance and preparedness](https://app.cristin.no/projects/show.jsf?id=2571637) (2022-25).

Author: Thanks @LianeHughes We didn't find updates to the HERA consolidation project.

* The [NORM/NORM-VET report on antimicrobial use and resistance in Norway (2012)](https://unn.no/Documents/Kompetansetjenester,%20-sentre%20og%20fagr%C3%A5d/NORM%20-%20Norsk%20overv%C3%A5kingssystem%20for%20antibiotikaresistens%20hos%20mikrober/Rapporter/NORM%20NORM-VET%202021.pdf) (in PDF).

## Dashboards and visualization platforms
Several national registries, involved in tracking infectious disease cases, have their own dashboards for viewing data. All these platforms are available in Norwegian only:

* Norwegian Immunisation Registry (SYSVAK) for [COVID-19](https://statistikk.fhi.no/sysvak/antall-vaksinerte?etter=diagnose&diagnose=COVID_19&fordeltPaa=maaned) and [influensa](https://statistikk.fhi.no/sysvak/antall-vaksinerte?etter=diagnose&diagnose=INFLUENSA&fordeltPaa=maaned) vaccinations.

* [Norwegian Surveillance System for Communicable Diseases (MSIS)](https://statistikk.fhi.no/msis/sykdomshendelser?etter=diagnose&fordeltPaa=maaned) shows registered cases of infectious diseases in Norway by month, year, age, region, and more. The data is also available in [table format](https://msis.no/).

> * [Norwegian Surveillance System for Antimicrobial Drug Resistance (NORM) atlas](https://norm-atlas.no/) visualizes NORM database entries over time, divided by regions.

Author: Done, thanks @LianeHughes :)

## National data sources
<!--- A section to list and provide context to national data sources. In the context of BY-COVID, a data source can be a repository which should include at least the metadata and ideally the data, that might not be directly available when considering sensitive data. Also, repositories should have the capacity to share this data and therefore have a governance model in place on how to do it. It can also include registries of data sources important for the field, with a direct link to the original data sources to be able to request access to the data. --->

> The FHI operates three national electronic reporting systems that are involved in surveillance of infectious diseases. Healthcare providers and laboratories use the following three systems to register cases, allowing health authorities to access data in real-time.

Reviewer: I think it's a bit confusing that you say 3 projects here and then list four things (I understand that the fourth is an associated project and that is why it is listed here). I think that it'd be good to say e.g. 'three registries (then name them) and one associated (name it)' because then it'll be easy to understand what you're about to read

Reviewer: I still find this a bit confusing, I think it could be made clearer with a slight change to the text to make it clear which are the three registries, just so it's clear why 4 are listed below

Author: Updated the section :)

* [The National Advisory Unit on Detection of Antimicrobial Resistance (K-res)](https://unn.no/fag-og-forskning/k-res) provides laboratory-based services for the detection and surveillance of antimicrobial resistance in Norway. The unit offers diagnostic and advisory services, trains healthcare professionals, and advises on appropriate antibiotic distribution and use.
* [Norwegian Society for Medical Microbiology (Norsk forening for medisinsk mikrobiologi (NFMM)](https://www.legeforeningen.no/foreningsledd/fagmed/norsk-forening-for-medisinsk-mikrobiologi/) is a national association to bring together experts from medical microbiology fields for knowledge-exchange. NFMM also provides a [database of clinical laboratories that take care of infectious disease, pathogen, and related sampling](https://www.legeforeningen.no/foreningsledd/fagmed/norsk-forening-for-medisinsk-mikrobiologi/fag/kliniske-laboratorier-i-norge/).

### Institutional initiatives on antimicrobial resistance (AMR)

> There are national research projects focused towards pathogenomics to help improve agriculture, food, public health, environment, and biodiversity in Norway. Also, higher education institutions and industrial organisations have forums and research centres dedicated to addressing the topics of antimicrobial resistance and pandemic preparedness.

Reviewer: I changed from 'improve' because I am not sure what it means to 'improve agriculture', but perhaps my phrasing isn't the best here anyway

> There are national research projects focused towards pathogenomics to help improve agriculture, food, public health, environment, and biodiversity in Norway. Also, higher education institutions and industrial organisations have forums and research centres dedicated to addressing the topics of antimicrobial resistance and pandemic preparedness.

Author: Thanks for rephrasing, sounds better.

* [PathoSeq](https://nofima.com/projects/pathoseq/), a project on sequencing pathogenic bacteria for food safety. More information is available on the [University of Oslo PathoSeq page](https://www.jus.uio.no/ifp/english/research/projects/nrccl/pathoseq/).

> * [Interdisciplinary Forum for Research on Antimicrobial resistance (INFRA)](https://www.med.uio.no/she/english/network/INFRA/index.html), University of Oslo

Reviewer: For this and the one below, perhaps we need a sentence on what they are?

Author: Do you mean for PathoSeq and INFRA? We think titles and websites are sufficient here, as descriptions are mentioned on their homepages.

* [The Antibiotic Centre for Primary Care](https://www.med.uio.no/helsam/english/research/groups/general-practice-medicine/asp/), University of Oslo
* The [Centre for new antibacterial strategies (CANS)](https://uit.no/research/cans?p_document_id=648381&Baseurl=/research/) at the Arctic University of Norway (UiT) comprises 16 research groups across three faculties, dedicated to AMR-related marine bioprospecting, pharmacology, and surveillance.

### Institutional initiatives on epidemic/pandemic research
* [Pandemic Centre](https://www.uib.no/en/pandemic) at the University of Bergen aims to address the topic of how to handle and prevent pandemics, and raise awareness through knowledge-exchange activities.
* [Centre for Epidemic Interventions Research (CEIR)](https://www.fhi.no/en/about/departments-and-centres/ceir/), at the FHI, works towards understanding and further improving epidemic preparedness and risk control.

> In addition to national and municipality-level efforts, Norway has also been involved in international projects and initiatives to help address infectious disease control and contribute to research in the field .

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to national and municipality-level efforts, Norway has also been involved in international projects and initiatives to help address infectious disease control and contribute to research in the field. This includes:

```

> * [OneHealth](https://www.fhi.no/en/id/infectious-diseases/smitte-fra-mat-vann-og-dyr/flere-artikler/the-largest-ever-health-project-funded-from-the-eus-horizon-2020/)

Reviewer: Perhaps these need a sentence to describe what each is in brief?

Author: Do you mean CEIR and OneHealth? For latter, the page has information about it in detail so to avoid repetition we didn't feel the need to add description.

Author: Do you mean CEIR and OneHealth? For latter, it is already mentioned under 'Projects' section of Disease surveillance initiatives: "The European Joint Programme One Health is a research program across Europe that promotes collaborative actions on foodborne zoonoses, antimicrobial resistance, and emerging threats."

* [Network for One Health Resistome Surveillance (NORSE)](https://www.fhi.no/en/cristin-projects/ongoing/norse---network-for-one-health-resistome-surveillance/). 
* Nordic Vets Against AMR [(Article by Sternberg-Lewerin et al (2022)](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9405251/)
* [Nordic Society of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases (NSCMID)](https://www.nscmid.org/)

> * [Nordic Ovine Research, Surveillance and Epidemiology](https://nordicagriresearch.org/norse/), part of the Nordic Joint Committee for Agricultural and Food Research

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [Nordic Ovine Research, Surveillance and Epidemiology](https://nordicagriresearch.org/norse/), part of the Nordic Joint Committee for Agricultural and Food Research.
```
